1. inductive reasoning - reasoning based on observations, or reaching conclusions from evidence 

    conclusions we reach are probably, but not definitely, true 

    We are using inductive reasoning constantly, often without even realizing it. 

    It provides the mechanism for using past experience to guide present behavior. 

2. Factors contributing to strength of the argument 

    Representativeness of observations - How well do the observations about a particular category represent all of the members of that category 

    No.of Observations 

    Quality of the evidence - Stronger evidence results in stronger conclusions. 

3. Illusory correlations occur when a correlation between two events appears to exist, but in reality there is no correlation or it is much weaker than it is assumed to be. 

4. heuristics — “rules of thumb” that are likely to provide the correct answer to a problem but are not foolproof 

    availability heuristics - is related to how often *we* expect events to occur 

        it doesn’t always lead to errors 

        Stereotype — an oversimplified generalization about a group or class of people that often focuses on the negative. 

            this phenomenon is related to availability heuristic. - Chapman & Chapman, 1969; Hamilton, 1981 

    Representativeness heuristic - people often make judgments based on how much one event resembles another event. 

        Base rate - is the relative proportion of different classes in the population. 

        experiment of judging jobs - Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman (1974) 

 

 

        when any descriptive information is available, people disregard the base rate information, and this can potentially cause errors in reasoning. 

        however, that the right kind of descriptive information can increase the accuracy of a judgment. 

 

 

        conjunction rule - which states that the probability of a conjunction of two events (A and B) cannot be higher than the probability of the single constituents (A alone or B alone) 

 

 

        but people ignored the above rule and picked the statment according to Representative heuristic. - Tversky and Kahneman (1983) 

        People tend to violate it even if they understand it 

5. People also make errors in reasoning by ignoring the importance of the size of the sample on which observations are based 

    experiment on guessing birth gender possibility - Tversky & Kahneman, 1974 

    law of large numbers 

    samples of small numbers of individuals will be less representative of the population. 

    People often assume that representativeness holds for small samples, and this results in errors in reasoning  

6. Another influence on judgment is the knowledge, attitudes, and 

preconceptions that people bring to the situation.  - Charles Lord and coworkers (1979) 

 

 

7. Confirmation bias—our beliefs are often based on paying attention 

to the information that upholds them while at the same time 

tending to ignore the information that challenges them 

8. Myside Bias - The tendency for people to generate and evaluate evidence and test their hypotheses in a way that is biased toward their own opinions and attitudes - McKenzie, 2004 

    It is a type of Confirmation bias 

9. Cognitive Bias - involves favoring information that confirms your previously existing beliefs or biases. 

10. Expected utility theory - assumes that people are basically rational. 

    if people have all of the relevant information, they will make a decision that results in the maximum expected utility.(Manktelow, 1999; Reber, 1995). 

    utility - refers to outcomes that achieve a person’s goals  

    Economists who studied decision making thought about utility in terms of monetary value 

    utility approach specifies procedures that make it possible to determine which choice would result in the highest monetary value. 

 

 

    People regularly behave in ways that ignore the optimum way of responding based on probabilities.  

    EX: Casino,  

        experiment by Veronica Denes-Raj and Seymour Epstein (1994) 

        Travel by car or plane 

        Deal or no deal show - Thierry Post and coworkers (2008)  - showed that contestants’ choices are determined not just by the amounts of money led in the briefcases but by what has happened leading up to their decision. 

            when they are doing good - more likely to accept the deal. 

            Doing bad - more likely to take risks. 

                reason maybe that they want to avoid -ve feeling of being a loser 

    therefore psychologists conclude that people won't behave as proposed by the above theory. 

 

 

    Gigerenzer, 2004 -  calculated that the number of Americans who lost their lives on the road by avoiding the risk of flying was higher than the total number of passengers killed on the four hijacked flights 

11. emotions can play a role in decision making. 

    proof - people with damage to an area of their prefrontal cortex, who suffer from flattened emotions and an inability to respond to emotional events, have impaired decision making. 

12. Personal qualities unrelated to brain damage have also been linked to decision making 

13. Risk avoidance - Anxious people tend to avoid making decisions that could potentially lead to large negative consequences - (Maner & Schmidt, 2006; Paulus & Yu, 2012 

    Risk aversion — the tendency to avoid taking risks. 

        It is the tendency to believe that a particular loss will have a greater impact than a gain of the same size (Tversky & Kahneman, 1991). 

14. optimistic people are more likely to ignore negative information and focus on positive information, causing them to base their decisions on incomplete information. 

    => can lead to poor decision making - Izuma & Adolphs, 2011 

15. Expected emotions - emotions that people predict they will feel for a particular outcome. 

16. Deborah Kermer and coworkers (2006) - compared people’s expected emotions with their actual emotions - showed that people can inaccurately predict their emotions.  

    EX: Exp of coin flip - win $5 or lose $3 , u have $5 

 

 

    the actual effect of losing was substantially less than predicted, but the positive effect of winning was only a little less than predicted. 

    after their gamble, the positive effect of winning and negative effect of losing turned out to be about equal. 

17. One reason people overestimate what their -ve feelings will be is that they don't consider the various coping mechanisms they may use. 

    the inability to correctly predict the emotional outcome of a decision can lead to inefficient decision making 

18. Incidental emotions - emotions that are not caused by having to make a decision. 

    can be related to a *person’s general disposition* - something that happened earlier in the day, or the general environment such as background music being played in a game show or the yells of the game show audience. 

 

 

    Uri Simonsohn  

        2007 - analysis of university admissions decisions in which he found that applicants’ academic attributes were more heavily weighted on cloudy days than on sunny days (nonacademic attributes won out on sunny days). 

        2009 - prospective students visiting an academically highly rated university were more likely to enroll if they had visited the campus on a cloudy day 

    Jennifer Lerner and coworkers (2004) 

        emotions can affect the economic decisions of establishing selling and buying prices 

        disgust is associated with a need to expel things - buy and sell low 

        sad emotions are associated with a need for change. - buy low but sell high 

    Judge Jerome Frank (1930) - Justice is what the judge had for breakfast. 

        Shai Danziger and coworkers (2011) - taking a meal increased favorable responses. else before taking meal it was stricter..? 

19. opt-in - procedure because it requires the person to take an active step 

opt-out - procedure, in which everyone 

is a potential organ donor unless he or she requests not to be 

    EX: Organ donation - Johnson & Goldstein, 2003 

        it showed status quo bias  

Status quo bias — the tendency to do nothing when faced with making a decision. 

    People tend to stick to default options. 

20. framing effect — decisions are influenced by how the choices are stated, or framed 

    EX: whether to release or not a convict - Paul Slovic and coworkers (2000) 

 

 

21. neuroeconomics, combines research from the fields of psychology, neuroscience, and economics to study how brain activation is related to decisions that involve potential gains or losses - Lee, 2006 

    This research shows that decisions are often influenced by emotions, and that these emotions are associated with activity in specific areas of the brain. 

 

 

    Alan Sanfey and coworkers (2003) - brain activity was measured as they played the *ultimatum game* - involves two players, one designated as the *proposer* and the other as the *responder*. proposer splits money responder says whether ok  or not but if not ok they get none. 

    when subjects received exactly the same offers from their computer partner, more accepted “unfair” proposals. 

    Anterior insula - an area located deep within the brain between the parietal and temporal lobes, 

        was activated about three times more strongly when responders rejected an offer than when they accepted it.  

        it is in area that deals with -ve states of emotion. 

    prefrontal cortex (PFC) had same amount of activation for both cases. 

    i.e., the emotional goal of resenting unfairness is handled by the anterior insula, and the cognitive goal of accumulating money is handled by the PFC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22. Deductive reasoning - we determine whether a conclusion logically follows from statements called *premises*. 

    basic form of deductive reasoning called the - syllogism. 

        categorical syllogisms - in which the premises and conclusion are statements that begin with All, No, or Some 

        EX: 

            All A are B 

            All B are C 

            => All A are C 

 

 

            A syllogism is *valid* when the form of the syllogism indicates that its conclusion follows logically from its two premises. - it doesn't mean it is true. 

            ||y true doesn't imply valid. 

 

 

        Belief bias — the tendency to think a syllogism is valid if its conclusion is believable. 

 

 

        Mental model - is a specific situation represented in a person’s mind that can be used to help determine the validity of syllogisms in deductive reasoning. - Phillip Johnson-Laird, 1999. 

            The basic principle behind mental models is that people create a model, or representation of the situation, for a reasoning problem.  

            They generate a tentative conclusion based on this model and then look for exceptions that might falsify the model. If they do find an exception, they modify the mode 

 

 

        Conditional syllogisms -  have two premises and a conclusion like categorical syllogisms, but the first premise has the form “If ... then.” 

            p- statement, q- reasoning 

            p therefore q - valid - Modus ponens 

            not q therefore not p - valid - Modus tollens 

            q therefore p - not valid  

            not p therefore not q - not valid 

         

        people are often better at judging the validity of syllogisms when real-world examples are substituted for abstract symbols. 

            EX: wason four card problem - 1966 

        Falsification principle - To test a rule, it is necessary to look for situations that would falsify the rule. 

        Permission schema - which states that if a person satisfies a specific condition, then he or she gets to carry out an action 

 