1. around 10% of world’s population is suffering from depression 

    in India it is 36% 

2. Major depression/Unipolar depression - Serious clinical mood disorder, which interferes with a person's everyday life for weeks or months at a time. 

    someone experiences persistent and intense feelings of sadness for extended periods of time, then they may have major depressive disorder (MDD). 

3. Remitted depressives - individuals have recovered from depressive episodes. 

4. Symptoms: 

    feelings: 

        Sadness,anger,guilt,hopelessness 

    thoughts: 

        poor self-esteem 

        suicide 

        loss of interest 

    Behavior: 

        social Withdrawal 

        Lack of energy 

        low motivation 

        poor concentration 

        sleep problems 

        significant changes in appetite 

5. Causes: 

    Environmental factors: 

        Childhood Trauma(even isolation ,severe illness come under it) 

        Major life events 

        Hormonal changes 

    Imbalance in neurotransmitters 

        Serotonin - feel good chemical 

            it also helps in growing new brain cells 

        stress damages brain cells 

    Genetically transmitted too... see more (writing needed) 

6. It causes Tendency to allocate excessive attention to negative category of stimuli than positive category of stimuli 

7. Emotional stroop task exp shows higher reaction rates than normal people for both cases of currently depressed or remitted people. 

8. findings indicate that like currently depressed individuals, currently remitted individuals with unipolar depression might also not be able to allocate sufficient resources to cognize positive information. 

    and that they need help to access +ve memories, if available or reinterpret -ve memories in more balanced manner 

 

 

    these biases should be targeted through long-term specific interventions during, and even after, a depressive episode. 

9. Successful treatment of depression not only requires a successful resolution of depressed symptoms but, more importantly, change in the underlying, stable cogni4ve factors that increase susceptibility for repeated episodes. 

10. psychological treatment like *cognitive behavioral therapy *influence the later stage of information- processing, presumably via an effect on frontal control regions 

11. inclusion of both the pharmacological and psychological treatment is needed 

12. treatment: 

    Medications (antidepressants) 

    Counselling 

    Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) 

 