L10:

Till now, we've seen localization of brain functions.
Now, lets see the distributiveness


Each thing, a face, a rolling ball, has multiple reactoins inside brain.

> gaze of eyes of face, reaction on face, beautyful ness
> dpeth, color, shape of ball, speed.

Amygdala in temporal lobe of brain. Part of pain matrix.


Perception: (we are learning all behaviours of brain, one by one)

Perception - the experiences resulting from stimulation of the senses.

 >>> PERCEPTION is the GATEWAY  to all other cognition.

Properties:-

	> Perceptions can change based on added information. (like how the terrace roof was understood after, when shown completely.)
	> Perception can be based on a perceptual rule, or past experiecnes.
	> Perception occurs conjuction with action. MEH


L11:

Designing a perceiving machine is difficult:

Inverse projection problem
-	Objects make reverse impression on retina.
- 	Infinite objects can have the same projection. We can't 'see' depth.

Hidden or blurred objects

Viewpoint invariance : being able to decipher the same object from different viewpoints


Bottom up processing and top down processing:
PERCEPTION involves both 
> Bottom up means, from eyes to brain (current experiecns)
> Top down means from brain to eyes or hand (previous experieeneces, attention, expectations)

Humans advantage over computers is additional knowledge avaliable to humans via top-down processing


L12:

Hearing words in sentence also both top-down(minds already knows the language) and bottom-up (listening to words)

Experience of Pain:
If we distract persons attention, then pain lessens, indicating a top-down processing for pain from the mind.



Helmholtz likelihood principle:
	> Our knowledge enables us to determine what causes the pattern on our retinea
	> Process of unconscious inference



-> Gestalt Psychology - Max Wertheimer
	> gestalt not name of person. It means "put together".
	> Brain perception is more than sum of stimulii received.
	> Number of principles of perception organization.

		> Figure-ground relationship : perception dependss on what we percieve as figure and what as ground.

		> Apparent movement : our perception system asdds smoethign in the middle.

		> Principle of similarity : Similar things appear to be grouped.

		****> (olympic rings) Principle of pragnanz : princilpe of simplicity
			> we will percieve circles as circles and not broken figs.

		> Principle of proximity :  Nearer things appear to be grouped.
		> Principle of continuity : Smooth curves
		> Principle of closure : We close up broken circles or lines.
			Our perception is a complete object, rather than series of partial objects.

	> But where do these principles come from? Gestalt's say these are built in, and experiences play almost minor role in perception.
		> Gestalts acknowledge that experience affects but in a minor way. Lol. Lamesies.
		> Contradiction to helmholtz likelihood principle.


Regularities in environment :

	> Physical regularities
		> horizontal and verticle manmade structurews and also natural trees

	> Semantic Regularites:
		> activities assicoaites witha situation, pouring oil while cooking, checking at the airprt, etc.

	Scene Schema, typical knowledge of what a scene contains.

Baysian inference:

	> Two factors, 
		prior probability : initial belief
		avaliable evidence : likelihood

	Multiply both



L13:


Experience can shape the neurons.
> Our eyes have more receptors for horizontal and veritcal things.

Experience dependent plasticity

----------------------------------
Perception and action:

> Occipetal lobe : recieves vision input
> Temporal Lobe : What pathway
> Parietal Lobe : Where\How pathway

Close connection between perceiving objects and interacting with them.
What pathway and Where pathway exist seperately.

Women cant keep mail in static slot _ what pathway gone
Women can keep mail in rotation slot - where pathway working!

Perception -> What Pathway
Action -> Where/How Pathway

-------------------------------------
Percetion and Emotion:

	Broaden-and-Build Thoery of positive emotions :-

	Positive emotions  -> Broaden the scope of attention. Distributed Attention. Can think a lot of things.

	Negative Emotions  -> Narrows the scope of attention. Focussed attention

	Also reverse holds. Rashmi mam's experiment.

	Global Processing:
		> Easily register the happy emotional distractor.
		> Not much sensitive to negative emotional distractor.
		> (finally after these 6,9,8 thing, when participants were asked with a bunch of faces, if this emotinal DISTRACTOR was given before, if participant answered correctly, then more sensitive to distractors)

	Local processing,:
		> participant not much sensitive to positive emotions
		> more sensitive to negative emotion

	Hence, local attention sensitive to negative emotions, 
		global attention sensitive to positive emotions.


L14:

Social Perception : understanding others.

Difference between lies and truthful statements:
	
	Deceptive communication has
		> Less 1st person pronouns (I, me)
		> More negative emotion words, eg. "Except", "but"
		> More motion verbs Eg. go walk

		> Lies are less complex, less related to self, more negative in nature.





L15:

Attribution:
	understanding the cause of other's behaviours

not only HOW, but WHY. 

Theories of attribution

Jones & Davis:
	Correspondent Inferences := We conclude other's traits, based on their behaviour. when
		> That behaviour is freely chosen. (Not the behaviour under external factor)
		> Yeilds distinctive, non-common effects (Not the fact ur friend loves his wife )
		> Low in social desirability. Being show-off rather than quite individual.(the distinct behaviours, over the common ones)


Kelley's theory of causal attributions

	There could be N reasons for a particular action. (a friend bailing on you, your date being late, not getting a prmotion)

	> To make the task of attribution managable, we begin with a small question : 
		Did other's behaviour stem from 
			internal causes - our own nature, intentions
			OR
			external causes - some social/physical aspect

We focus on three main informations:

1. Consensus : the extent to which other people react to a given stimulii in the same manner as the person in question.

2. Consistency : the extent to which the person in question reacts to the same stimulii in same way, over another occasion.

3. Distinctiveness : The exxtent to which the person reacts in the same way, with other stimulii.

** see the consensus of the response, consistency and distinctiveness of the person in question.


Slide 97, 98. L10-17


even more biases:

	The actor-observer effect: "you fell; I was pushed"
		our behaviour mainly to external factors, Others behaviour mainly to internal factors.

	The self-serving Bias: "I'm good; you are lucky"
		attribute personal outcomes to internal causes

Almost the complete lecture on how you(Akash!) already percieve the world to be. flawed... cliche... self-centered... 

But nice lecture...



