L16:

Attention:
	
	> Selective Attention
	> Distraction
	> divided attention
	> attentional capture

Broadbent's filter model of attention:
	Bottleneck model - since, the filter is bottleneck
	Early selection model - since, at initial stage the selection is done.

	* the sensory memory holds ALL stimulii for a frac of a second. 
	* fitler filters the stimulii based on physical characteristics - voice, accent...
	* The detector then understands the meaning.

	* This output sent to short term memory, which may transfer to long term memory.


Attenuation Model, Leaky filter:
	
	Instead of a filter, a attenuator, based on physical characteristics and MEANING. And then a dictionary.

	> Each word in dictionary has a threshold to acitvate.
	> high threshold to senseless words. like "rutabaga"


Late selection model:
	 most of incoming words are processed and discarded later on	

Concept of perceptual load and processing capacity:

	> When less processing capacity demanded, perceptual load is noticed
	> When high processing capacity demamded, perceptual load is ignored. Sure!
	> The gorilla in the video.


Stroop effecet:
 	Reading words is sooo practised, its hard not to.

Overt attention:
	Shift attention by eye movement

Covert Attention:
	Shift attention by no eye movement 

saccadic eye movement: rapid jerky fixations. Sasuke vs  B!

we also have top-down(bocz of our past knowledge - traffic light searching) and bottom-up attention(bocz of the specific stimulii - a tree in a desert) patterns

L17:

If we have pre cues to a location or an object, we can respond faster on stimulii at that place

> Inattentional Blindness... visible but not registetred cause of not attending to it



Feature Integration Theory:
	> How an objects individual features become bound together?

Object -> Preattentive Stage -> Focused Attentive Stage -> Perception
		(Analyze into Features)  (Combine the features)


Illusonary Conjunctions: Mix up features of different objects.

Shown : red traingle, green ball
We think: red circle, green triangle


Attention to Face : FFA fusiform area in Temporal Lobe. "What"! temporal lobe

Attention to house : PPA in temproal lobe. "What"! is answered in temporal lobe






